

# Loop Control Statements in Linux

## 1. Break Statement

The `break` statement in Bash is used to exit a loop prematurely based on a certain condition. It is typically used to terminate a loop when a specific condition is met. Here is the basic syntax:

```bash
while [ condition ]
do
    # Commands to be executed
    if [ some_condition ]
    then
        break
    fi
done
```

- **`condition`**: Represents the loop's main condition.
- **`some_condition`**: A condition that, when true, triggers the `break` statement, causing the loop to terminate.

Example:

```bash
counter=1
while [ $counter -le 10 ]
do
    echo "Iteration $counter"
    if [ $counter -eq 5 ]
    then
        break
    fi
    ((counter++))
done
```

This loop will print the numbers from 1 to 5 and then exit due to the `break` statement.

## 2. Continue Statement

The `continue` statement in Bash is used to skip the rest of the commands within a loop for the current iteration and move on to the next iteration. It is useful when you want to bypass specific iterations based on a condition. The syntax is as follows:

```bash
while [ condition ]
do
    # Commands to be executed
    if [ some_condition ]
    then
        continue
    fi
    # More commands that will be skipped if the continue statement is triggered
done
```

- **`condition`**: Represents the loop's main condition.
- **`some_condition`**: A condition that, when true, triggers the `continue` statement, skipping the remaining commands for the current iteration.

Example:

```bash
for i in {1..5}
do
    if [ $i -eq 3 ]
    then
        continue
    fi
    echo "Iteration $i"
done
```

This loop will print all iterations except for 3, as the `continue` statement skips the `echo` command for that particular iteration.

## Conclusion

Understanding the `break` and `continue` statements in Bash allows for more precise control over loop execution. These statements enhance the flexibility of loops by providing mechanisms to exit early or skip specific iterations based on certain conditions.

<br>

## Next | [Functions]()
