
# Using `echo` and `printf` for Debugging in Linux Scripting

Debugging is a crucial part of scripting, helping you identify issues and understand the flow of your code. In Linux scripting, the `echo` and `printf` commands are commonly used for debugging purposes. This tutorial will guide you through the effective use of `echo` and `printf` to debug your scripts.

## Using `echo` for Debugging

### Basic Usage

The `echo` command is a simple way to print messages to the terminal, providing insights into the script's execution:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

echo "Script started."
```

This will print "Script started." when the script is executed.

### Printing Variable Values

You can use `echo` to display the values of variables during runtime:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

name="Pavankumar"
echo "Hello, $name!"
```

This will print "Hello, John!" to the terminal.

### Verbose Output

Adding descriptive messages to your script using `echo` can help trace the execution flow:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

echo "Initializing script..."
# Rest of the script
echo "Script completed successfully."
```

This provides a clear indication of different stages in your script.

### Debugging Conditional Statements

You can use `echo` within conditional statements to understand the logic:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

number=10

if [ $number -gt 5 ]; then
    echo "Number is greater than 5."
else
    echo "Number is less than or equal to 5."
fi
```

This helps identify which branch of the conditional statement is executed.

## Using `printf` for Debugging

### Basic Usage

The `printf` command provides more advanced formatting capabilities than `echo`:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

printf "This is a formatted message: %s\n" "Hello, World!"
```

This will print a formatted message with "Hello, World!".

### Formatting Variables

You can use placeholders in `printf` to format variable values:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

name="Pavankumar"
age=25

printf "Name: %s\nAge: %d\n" "$name" $age
```

This will print formatted information about the `name` and `age` variables.

### Formatting Floating-Point Numbers

`printf` is useful for formatting floating-point numbers with precision:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

pi=3.14159

printf "Value of pi: %.2f\n" $pi
```

This will print the value of `pi` with two decimal places.

## Conclusion

Using `echo` and `printf` for debugging in Linux scripting is a practical and effective approach. These commands help you gain insights into the execution flow, display variable values, and format output for better readability. Experiment with different use cases to become proficient in leveraging `echo` and `printf` as valuable debugging tools in your Linux scripts.


<br>

## Next | [Setting and using breakpoints](https://github.com/hegdepavankumar/bash-scripting-tutorial/blob/main/Tutorial-Files/13.Debugging-Techniques/02.Setting_and_using_breakpoints.md)
