
# Managing Processes in Linux

Managing processes in Linux is a fundamental skill for system administrators and users. This tutorial covers the usage of `ps`, `kill`, and `jobs` commands to monitor, control, and interact with processes in a Linux environment.

## `ps` Command - Process Status

The `ps` command provides information about currently running processes. Here are some common options:

### Basic Usage

```bash
ps
```

This command displays a snapshot of currently running processes in the current terminal.

### Displaying Detailed Information

```bash
ps aux
```

The `aux` options display a detailed list of all processes, including those owned by other users.

### Filtering Processes

```bash
ps aux | grep "process_name"
```

You can use `grep` to filter processes based on their names.

### Displaying Tree Structure

```bash
ps auxf
```

The `f` option shows processes in a tree structure, illustrating parent-child relationships.

## `kill` Command - Terminating Processes

The `kill` command is used to terminate or signal processes. Here are some common options:

### Terminating a Process by PID

```bash
kill PID
```

Replace `PID` with the process ID of the target process.

### Sending a Specific Signal

```bash
kill -TERM PID
```

Use the `-TERM` option to send the termination signal (15) to the specified process.

### Forcing Termination

```bash
kill -9 PID
```

The `-9` option sends the `SIGKILL` signal, forcefully terminating the specified process.

## `jobs` Command - Monitoring Background Jobs

The `jobs` command displays a list of current jobs in the shell. Here are some common options:

### Listing Jobs

```bash
jobs
```

This command lists all background jobs associated with the current shell session.

### Bringing a Job to the Foreground

```bash
fg %1
```

Use `fg` to bring a job with ID 1 to the foreground. Replace `1` with the job ID displayed by the `jobs` command.

### Sending a Job to the Background

```bash
bg %1
```

The `bg` command sends job 1 to the background.

## Conclusion

Understanding how to manage processes in Linux is essential for maintaining system stability and performance. The `ps` command provides insights into running processes, while `kill` allows you to terminate or signal them. The `jobs` command is useful for monitoring and controlling background jobs. Combine these commands to effectively manage processes in your Linux environment.


<br>

## Next | [Job scheduling with crontab](https://github.com/hegdepavankumar/bash-scripting-tutorial/blob/main/Tutorial-Files/14.Advanced-Scripting-Techniques/02.Job_scheduling_with_cron.md)
