

## Linux Signal Handling

In Linux, signals are software interrupts that notify a process that a specific event has occurred. Signal handling allows processes to respond to these events, such as errors or user-defined conditions. Each signal is identified by a unique integer number, and it has a predefined meaning.

### Common Signals:

- **SIGTERM (15):** Termination signal. This is a gentle request for a process to terminate.
- **SIGKILL (9):** Kill signal. This forcefully terminates a process.
- **SIGHUP (1):** Hangup signal. Often used to reload configuration files.
- **SIGINT (2):** Interrupt signal. Generated when the user presses Ctrl+C.


### Signal Handling in Bash:

In a Bash script, you can use the `trap` command to set up signal handlers.

```bash
#!/bin/bash

function handle_signal() {
    echo "Received signal"
    # Handle the signal here
}

trap 'handle_signal' SIGINT SIGTERM

# Rest of the script
# ...
```

- **`trap 'handler' signals`:** Sets up a trap to catch the specified signals and execute the given handler.

### Common Signal Use Cases:

1. **Graceful Shutdown:**
   - Use SIGTERM to gracefully shut down a process, allowing it to clean up before termination.

2. **Restart or Reload:**
   - Use SIGHUP to signal a process to reload its configuration.

3. **Ctrl+C Handling:**
   - Use SIGINT to capture the Ctrl+C interrupt and handle it appropriately.

4. **Error Handling:**
   - Use custom signals for error handling within your application.

### Conclusion:

Understanding and implementing signal handling is crucial for creating robust and responsive Linux applications, allowing them to gracefully handle various events and user interactions.


<br>

## Next | [Security Best Practices](https://github.com/hegdepavankumar/bash-scripting-tutorial/tree/main/Tutorial-Files/15.Security-Best-Practices)
